Before we end this
section on where are we,
we really want to give
you an opportunity
to talk with each other.
But we're going
to ask you to talk
to each other in
a particular way,
and we're going to
invite you to really
talk and go deeper into
sharing what you are feeling.
Not the thoughts, not the how
to fix it, but just stay to what
is here with you at this time.
Wow, you know,
that's, like, a lot
to be responsible
for, to feel what's
actually going on in the world.
Being here is
sparking a passion.
I can feel a fire in my
belly that's like, it's time.
I'd like you to get
in touch with one word.
I know there are many
feelings, but if you have
just one word of a feeling.
And then what I'd
like you to do is
start over here and just
stand and say that one word
and remain standing.
And each person will just say
one word but remain standing.
Would you be willing to begin?
-Truth.
-Pain.
-Depressed.
Heartbreak.
Calling.
Shaking.
Courage.
Humanity.
And it's like the point of
this, the point of opening
ourselves up to
these emotions, is
that when we get in touch
with these, our power to act
increases.
When we don't feel the
pain, when we don't feel
the injustice, we're
not very invested
in doing anything about it.
When we allow ourselves to
feel pain and grief, sadness
and these other emotions,
our desire, our ability,
our impetus to take action
increases enormously.
So I think we're ready to move
into the second question now.
From looking at, where
are we, it's time
to look at how we got here.
And what's so
important for us is
to take a moment before
leaping into action
and look at the real root causes
of some of the dysfunction
that we've been seeing
in that first section.
Let's examine how it
is that we got here
before we look at what
possibilities exist
for action and for change.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
Now that we've looked
squarely at where we are,
a good question to
ask might be, how
did an intelligent, well-meaning
species who for the most part
only wanted to make the
world better and more secure
for their children end
up in such a condition?
What could possibly
explain how we got
into our current predicament?
How did we get here?
Someone who looked
deeply at this question
was Thomas Berry, a cultural
historian and cosmologist who
spent much of his life examining
the relationship between humans
and the community
of life on Earth.
Thomas Berry says that
the primary problem
with Western civilization is
that it creates and perpetuates
a radical separation
between the human world
and the natural
world, that we've
given all the rights to
the human and no rights
to the natural world.
We think we're behaving
very rationally,
that we're on this kind of
a logical economic course.
But actually we're heading
toward our destruction,
and the only way
to explain it is
that we've been locked into a
kind of mythic entrancement,
a worldview that's
become dysfunctional
and therefore destructive.
According to Thomas
Berry, our industrial age
could be characterized
as a period
of technological entrancement
in which our obsession
with progress has us marching
toward an ill-defined, magical
paradise somewhere in the
future, a future in which we
have mastered the Earth
and everything on it
without any limits.
And so it could be said
that we in the modern world
are living in a kind of trance.
Indigenous people
would call this trance
the dream of the modern world.
This dream could also be
called our current worldview,
a way of seeing the world we're
not even aware that we have.
A worldview is held in
place by a set of beliefs
and unexamined assumptions that
we're completely unaware of,
like glasses we've worn so
long we don't even know we're
looking through them anymore.
People's actions correlate
with their worldview.
We take actions consistent
with how we see the world,
and often those actions
produce outcomes
we didn't predict or intend.
So when our actions produce
outcomes we're not intending,
it's important to identify
the unconscious, unexamined
assumptions that generated those
actions in the first place.
All the crises
we're facing today
can be seen as the
unintended result
of the unexamined
assumptions that
permeate the modern, industrial
society and our own thinking.
So let's look at some of
these unexamined assumptions.
One way to characterize
the cosmology that really is
at work in our culture is
this, that the natural world,
the Earth, is there for us to
satisfy our needs and desires,
whatever that might be.
So we want to make things.
We use the Earth.
We make things.
And we think of it as
something like a lumber yard.
In fact, we use
the word, resource.
So the Earth is filled with
resources that are there
for us to use as we see fit.
Now, that orientation
actually is not that bad
so long as humans are
not that powerful.
But suddenly, when we
become so massively present,
that orientation turns out to
be completely pathological.
In modern society,
many of us believe
that our job as
smart shoppers is
to get the highest level
of comfort and convenience
at the lowest possible price.
We assume that when we buy
something, the price we pay
reflects the full
cost of making it.
According to Annie Leonard
in "The Story of Stuff,"
maybe not.
I was walking to work, and I
wanted to listen to the news.
I found this cute, little
green radio for $4.99.
I was standing there in
line to buy this thing,
and I was thinking, how
could $4.99 possibly
capture the costs
of making this radio
and getting it into my hands?
The metal was probably
mined in South Africa.
The petroleum was
probably drilled in Iraq.
The plastics were probably
produced in China.
And maybe the whole thing
was assembled in Mexico.
$4.99 wouldn't even pay the
rent for the shelf space
it occupied until I came
along, let alone part
of the staff guy's salary
who helped me pick it out
or the multiple ocean
cruises and truck rides
pieces of this radio went on.
That's how I realized I
didn't pay for the radio.
So who did pay?
Well, these people
paid with the loss
of their natural resource base.
These people paid with the
loss of their clean air,
with increasing asthma
and cancer rates.
All along this system,
people pitched in so I
could get this radio for $4.99.
Many people assume
that we can create
a healthy society by
concentrating solely
on our success as individuals.
We are not just individuals.
We are part of a society,
a worldwide society.
We are interdependent,
and that interdependence
flows at many levels.
It's spiritual.
It is psychological.
It is economic.
The notion that we can exist
and prosper just individually,
based purely on what
we do and what we earn,
is a rather new notion in
history, and it doesn't work.
Another prevalent assumption
is that racism is primarily
an expression of
personal prejudice
and the way individuals
treat each other.
The effects of
institutionalized racism
are harder to see and to change.
Racism has a cost to every
human being on this planet.
Racism has
dehumanized all of us.
We are not taught how it was
set up, how it came into being,
how the very fact
that we have something
called race means that
we are ranking people
and that we are
giving white people
more value than everyone else.
Until we understand
the depth of that,
it's going to be
hard to undo racism.
It's going to be hard to change.
What we try to do is change
people that aren't making it
in the system
rather than changing
the systems that make sure
that some people don't make it.
We don't just have unexamined
assumptions about how
we relate to the planet.
We have underlying
assumptions that we
haven't examined about how
we relate to each other.
We have a society
that believes that we
have throwaway resources,
throwaway species,
and throwaway people.
The same mindset that says
I can ball up this can
and throw it away,
the same mindset
says, I can ball up this
child and throw that child
into a prison
forever for a mistake
that that child made,
similar to a mistake
my child might be making
with drugs or whatever.
That's the core mindset.
When you say you're going
to throw something away,
where is away?
There's no such thing.
And where away actually is
is social justice issues and
environmental justice issues.
Every plastic bag, plastic
cup, plastic to-go container,
that is the petroleum
complex in Africa,
Ecuador, Columbia, Alaska.
You name it.
Every paper bag, paper plate,
paper napkin, that is a forest.
Everything that is called
waste or disposable
is the ways in
which we are saying
that it is acceptable to throw
our planet and its people away.
Disposables are one of the huge
magnifiers of how we've lost
our connection to the sacred.
Just take it for granted that
we're going to go to the coffee
shop and get coffee that came
from an exploited community
somewhere where a forest was
destroyed for a monoculture.
Put it in a paper cup
that used to be a forest.
Put a plastic lid
on top of it that
used to be an
indigenous community
somewhere in a beautiful area.
Drink it, and then
throw it away where
it goes back and
pollutes a nature
community or a human
community at the end.
I am so fiercely
passionate about it
because I know in my heart
that as long as we are trashing
the planet and
trashing each other,
a healthy and holistic and
healed world is not possible.
We cannot have peace
on the Earth unless we
also have peace with the Earth.
The dream of the modern world
is constructed almost entirely
out of assumptions
that have simply
been accepted for generations.
Questioning these
assumptions is a powerful way
to begin to awaken from
our collective trance.
[END PLAYBACK]
We wanted to share some of
the unexamined assumptions
that we found in our
own lives as we've
become engaged in this work.
I, for instance, know that an
unexamined assumption that I
was working with for a
long time was that if I can
afford to buy
something, then I should
just go ahead and do that.
Linked to that
was the assumption
that whatever I chose to do
was free of adverse affect
on other people.
One of them that comes up
for me is that if I work hard
and I'm a positive thinker,
I'll somehow not have
to deal with racism and sexism.
I think there's
another prevalent
assumption that opportunity
exists for everybody.
And if we don't get
ahead, it's probably
because we haven't worked hard
enough or tried hard enough.
Or we're not smart enough.
So we'd actually like to
give you an opportunity
to look and see some of the
assumptions that are playing
out in your own lives, the
assumptions that maybe exist
in your thinking that you
haven't previously looked at
but are the assumptions that are
leading you into-- particularly
these-- the assumptions that
lead you into behaviors you
don't want,
behaviors that aren't
consistent with a
sustainable and a just
and a fulfilling future.
So really, in conversation,
what can you find?
What are the
unexamined assumptions
that now you can
become aware of that
are driving our behavior here
together in the modern world?
One assumption
is the expectation
that government and leaders
will take care of the problems
that we're witnessing
and learning about here.
And another one is
just kind of as adults
that we are defined by
what we do in the world,
especially on a
professional level.
One of them was we think
we are doing something,
but we are not
doing nearly enough.
And another one is also science
and technology will save us.
Are two unexamined
assumptions were
that I'm a separate
individual, that, like, we're
somehow not connected.
And our other one was
that we can conquer life,
that we can master our domain.
This distinction of
unconscious, unexamined
assumptions, for me,
is really the most
powerful part of the symposium.
Every time I start
thinking about it,
I discover yet another
unexamined assumption
that's got hold of me.
And what I love about it is
that when you identify them,
they begin to lose
their grip on your life.
We're caught in unconscious,
unexamined assumptions.
More is better.
There's not enough to go around.
If you read it, it's true.
You can't really
make a difference.
It's too big.
All of these unconscious,
unexamined assumptions
kind of paralyze us and keep
us from making a difference
with our life, really
getting into action,
really knowing that
we matter and that we
can change the world.
See if you can identify
some unexamined assumptions
of your own.
Look in several areas--
your beliefs about the world
around you, about other people,
about yourself, about purpose
and meaning in life.
And when you've written down
several unexamined assumptions,
come on back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]